INT:  0:00
Okay, so as I explained before, you'll see the text again, but now you'll see your gaze, so basically where your eyes were looking when you were reading the text so you see what you were, how you were seeing before. So we'll go through all the pages again and the idea is basically just for you to kind of give an insight into what you were thinking. So like what were you thinking while reading the words, the sentences the text? What did you like, what didn't you like? Anything that stood out, any emotions, just basically kind of like free narrative, just saying what you thought idea. 

P02B [1:58]:
I immediately noticed that the text was a little odd, I didn't immediately realise what was happening but it just seemed a bit off. Like this 'doden en het voorkomen van ongelukken' (death, preventing accidents)... it was just, I don't know, it didn't really make sense to me. I still don't really understand what they were saying there. De 'zielen' (souls) also pretty strange. I was thinking of like Scientology or something, especially with America mentioned as well. But yeah, didn't really understand this part but also thought that it was perhaps due to the fact that it was the beginning of the story. Or maybe it was meant to be weird? Yeah, I don't really know.
[2:38]
Oh right, the striptease number [laughs]. That made me so confused, because suddenly we had like a striptease? Here, I did kind of think it might be due to translation or something, given the number linked to the population in the next sentence, that there was something maybe about a dystopian society where everyone like has a number or something? And not an actual striptease number or anything, but more like, as if everyone was numbered like Big Brother or something or you know today in China or the fear of what Chinese government will do with the whole social security number or social score or something? Maybe something like that? Because number made a little sense by itself, but not in the context.
[3:29]
'stoelen en asbakken waren van de muur weggehaald' (chairs and ashtrays were removed from the wall), like... were the ashtrays stuck on the wall? I kind of imagined one of those like funhouse or like carnival? What's the name, uhm, circus places where they have put furniture and rugs and lamps and stuff on like the top of the, on the ceiling or like a wall or something, but I don't think that's what they meant here [laughs]
[3:48]
It's like, double, because 'bespetterde druppels' (spattered drops) didn't make sense, like drops can create spatters and stuff, but spattered drops? 
[4:12]
Here there was just so much going on. I thought at first that the 'he' referred to in the middle referred to the painting, and I just didn't understand how a painting that was in the process of being painted looked like it was already about 35 years old. But yeah, I got it later [laughs], you see my eyes going back to the painter, so I got it was about him. Although I didn't really get his character. I remembered he was like 70 or something, but now I see he's much younger. 
[4:41] 
But yeah, like, I don't know, there was just so much going on here and I didn't really get how it all like fit together with the guy who was sitting here before, because I think that was someone else but then suddenly here was the painter and the remembrance service or something, and yeah, just didn't really see what was happening here. Oh right, yeah, I also didn't understand why the nurses and like were farming. I thought it might be a metaphor or something, but I didn't really understand the image then, and then I thought it might be a weird translation for like 'cultivating' and 'caring' or something, and the seeds, you know [laughs]  like something else, also because that guy was going to have a baby or something? But yeah, no, didn't really get it. 
[5:07]
I also think here is kind of where I also started giving up? Or like, not necessarily actually giving up but more like, accepting that I wouldn't really get the thing? Like, I was definitely intrigued and I was curious to find out where it was going but I was also kind of.. 'berustend' (transl. resigned) in the fact that I just didn't know what was happening
[5:22]
Also, what's a Dutch garden?? Just... confusing.
[5:36]
Yeah, so then suddenly, this song, I don't know what was happening or who was singing. It like, seemed to come from nowhere. I still don't really get what was the point? So it was like the guy singing it, the clerk or something. About a girl in purple? 
[5:57]
Ooh.. maybe the song was about like the process of switching yourself out for a new person, or.. how do you say that? Like the dystopian nature of this story, where one has to volunteer to die for the other, that that is what's meant here? And maybe there's something wrong with the 'baby' translation, or like, both a girl he's in love with and the baby as actual baby? Although that also works in English... well, anyway, still felt weird.
[6:47]
oh, you're a sad old duck. It was very strange. Like, that's not a phrase I've ever heard someone use in Dutch. I don't know, you just wouldn't say it like that. Like 'een vreemde eend in de bijt' (a strange duck in the pond), but I don't know, that's not really the point here is it? Yeah, so, like, yeah, that was weird.
[7:15]
Oh, on this page, I was confused about the 'nul' (transl. 'zero), like the zero in the number because it was like 'niets'. But then the phone number didn't make any sense. And later on, I understood that it was to be or not to be, but it didn't make sense at first, like because of the Dutch translation. Yeah, there were a whole bunch of silly names for the institute. I don't know why, total confusion. 
[8:17]
Also, like 'wees met z'n neus naar de broeder', 'pointed with his nose to the brother', like, maybe they meant something like 'looked down on the brother via his nose' or something or what is that expression? 'looked down his nose' or something? Well, don't know, but it makes no sense in Dutch.
[8:38]
Oh right, the 'doe-het-zelfmens' (do it yourself person), kind of sounds like a Barbie or something, or like Polly Pocket where you can build a person yourself… like Build-a-Bear! But I think it refers to killing yourself here? So maybe a dark play on that image? If it's the same in English then again of course.
[08:51]
I also don't get now why he called him 'opa' here... I think this is why I was confused before, wasn't he supposed like, he was 35 or something right? As in, the text above, there it said he was 35 if I remembered correctly? Yeah, so, no, don't quite get the reference here.
[09:11]
'een grove vrouw' (a coarse woman), like a big, eh, strong, like how you say, coarse woman? That's a bit odd right? I can only think of 'grove mosterd' (coarse mustard).
[09:29]
The description of purple though, that was lovely, very dramatic, in [laughs], in a very good way!
[09:48]
Isn't 'tourniquet' (tourniquet) like that method you use to tie off someone's limb if they lost too much blood? No idea what I should be imagining there. 
[10:01]
I thought the moustache part was very funny wasn't expecting that but it was pretty funny yeah.
[10:29]
'ze wachtte' (she waited), very dramatic note there at the end of the like, the page.

INT:
Any thing on this page?

[11:01]
Wait, I don't understand the… who is saying the 'heaven' thing. Is that the painter? Ooooh, it's Leora! Oh well, that isn't indicated clearly there at all. I hadn't really noticed that during reading the text before when I was reading, but yeah it's a little strange. 
[11:37]
Yeah, that sentence, yeah, I didn't understand the point; well, I mean, yeah, I think I get what it means but it just doesn't make sense at all. The pronouns? Or syntax? Not quite sure what's more wrong [laughs], but yeah, no. it's bad [laughs]. And like, yeah, on the one hand it's fine because I get the gist largely, but I also felt that this kind of took me out of like the narrative, and not just here but like constantly, also what I said above here and there, it's just a little confusing and makes you go like 'huh?' so you kind of get taken out of the story and you lose like track of what's going on. Like, I get the narrative probably, but it's like constantly in and out. 
[12:01]
'een lijk is een lijk' (a corpse is a corpse), well it's not wrong [laughs]. 
[12:16]
'ik ben in dienst' (transl. I am in service) makes it sound very military? Like, she's in the army or something? 
[12:25]
But yeah, the next one is very funny again, 'ontlasten' (transl. relieve), that just sounds like she's peeing or something [laughs]… It's just so funny but in such a bad way
[12:48]
Yeah, don't have much on the rest here, it's fine, fleshes out the characters a bit more. I did get more of a feeling for the story here, that was nice. 
[12:57]
Yeah, I don't know, I also felt that her job changed constantly? Or like, at least, the description, here it's 'gastvrouw' (transl. 'host'), which sounds more like you know receiving people at like the reception or something or like helping them get to places, whereas I think before it was like, like she was the one either pushing the button or like holding the hand while the person was like fading away. But yeah, no, I understand kind of what she does, but not the details.
[13:22]
'aardig' (transl. 'kind'), yeah, again, get what they mean but you just wouldn't say it like that in Dutch, but yeah.
[13:30]
'mooie jus' (transl. 'beautiful gravy') [laughs] No, that doesn't make any sense, it doesn't have any meaning. 

INT [13:42]
Okay, so now there is the pause, we will skip this.

P02B [14:02]
Yeah, not much here. I couldn't really connect with the characters here, she seemed very, yeah, I don't know, problematic? But yeah, it's also just like the text, you know the words and stuff, feel like there's a barrier there or something… also because I just don't really know what's actually there or what's weird or something.

P02B [14:32]
Oh 'tripjes' that's also very strange, I guess like triplets was translated into tripjes. I was also half thinking about like the, eh, 'verkleinwoord' (transl. diminutive), yeah the (INT: diminutive?) yeah! like the diminutive of a trip, like travelling somewhere? But yeah, no, I did quickly realise that it related to the kids so probably should've been triplets. But I don't know, is it a typo? I mean 'tripjes' doesn't mean anything like really does it? So, yeah, is this then like a translation or did someone like mistype something? 
[15:01]
I mean, yeah, this was pretty clear. I think this might be one of the sentences in the entire thing where I understand what's happening, feels like here it's clear like in set-up and setting and the whole like point of the story basically. But yeah, it seems like a good story, at least a good set-up!
[15:38]
Yeah, I think, yeah, this was pretty clear I think. Not sure if the text is getting better or if I'm more used to it now, but yeah, this was fine.
[15:55]
'grootvader van moeders kant' (transl. grandfather from mother's side) like yeah you can probably say this it like this in Dutch, but you wouldn't really? It just feels so long, yeah, I feel like you wouldn't just say it like this in conversation. 
[16:09]
Also like, 'reçu', also guess that that is Dutch, but yeah, I don't think I've ever heard someone actually say it.
[16:24]
'druplets' of 'drupés' I have never heard of that.

INT [16:34]
And like, what in general did you think of this imagery? As in, the metaphor and stuff?

P02B [16:45]
Eeeeh… It was fine I guess? I mean, I didn't really get it [laughs]. But at this point I also just had kind of given up on these kinds of things? I just yeah, I just kind of just skipped it if I didn't get it, so yeah, I don't know, I don't think I really thought about it. I mean, I do think it was clear that he was referring to like 'overpopulation' but yeah that's because he says that there [laughs]. 
[17:10]
'Dat is maar een mens' (transl. 'that's only a person') is just so stupid, because it's clearly 'dat is ook menselijk' of nou ja 'dat is maar menselijk' maybe ook? (transl. 'that is human' or well maybe 'that is just human' maybe too?). But yeah, just so clearly missed the point there. Also, now I'm thinking about it, I think you like could interpret this sentence very differently. Like, based on context and the likes I think I get what is meant here with 'only human' to want to have all children, but it can also be seen as very dismissive in this version or something? Well, not sure really, just thinking about that now, but yeah, don't know, it's weird.
[17:32]
Yeah, like, the 'Catbox' is that the same as 'kattenbak' (transl. 'litter box) in Dutch? Well, in any case, it was the only thing I could think of.
[18:01]
Okay, so I think this was just because I misread the thing, but I liked the wordplay, or how do you say, the link between 'welke je wilt houden' (transl. which one you want to keep') and 'houden van' (transl. to love), which yeah just this link between loving and keeping which is of course always present in Dutch, but yeah, I was thinking about it here which was nice. Don't think they meant to do that [laughs] but yeah.
[18:20]
Oh right, yeah, so here there was suddenly a revolver, so yeah I [laughs] yeah you can see that I'm going all the way back to the top, because I was like thinking, is there a cause? Was there like a direct 'aanleiding' (transl. cause), but yeah, didn't find anything, but yeah that's what's happening there [laughs].  
[18:59]
Yeah, so, yeah, I think this was pretty clear. Very dramatic but pretty clear. I did like the mindset of the painter, like the way it was presented and his thought process. I mean, I still don't like the words, like 'een heel kleine planeet' (transl. 'a very small planet') just sounds off to me, but yeah, I mean, in a large sense, with like a 'red thread', it was good.
[19:12]
Oh yeah, so I expected like 'doeken' here, so that's why I kind of returned to the word, it's a bit weird.
[19:42]
This is so typical! Like I liked this part and again I think the thought process of the painter is presented really nicely, but then you get the '2BRB' where there are just clearly letters missing. Like why [laughs]. Like this just takes you out of the story so much, yeah I think that was my issue that I just kind of feel outside the story the whole time, like just very detached from the narrative itself.

INT [20:02]
Okay, yeah, so this was the end. Did you like the story?

P02B:
Well, I mean, it was just… I think so, but yeah as I was saying I just felt that the translation kind of removed me from the story so I couldn't really get into it. Also because I think the writing style was pretty good here and there, but as if it was behind a screen that you can just not access it, like it's hidden behind a barrier of badly chosen words or something.

INT:
Okay, and did you realise it was a translation before filling in the questionnaire or after or?

P02B:
I did kind of guess it. Like, it was just so weird, so I kind of guessed that there was something going on, and then you kind of see some of these like phrases were just it's so clearly like an 'anglicism', so yeah, I kind of figured that it might be a translation yeah, but I didn't really understand why it was so bad. I was thinking maybe it was like via another language in Google Translate? Like you know the thing when they change it up? Yeah, it made me think of that. But yeah, I guess, it's difficult to say. I definitely had fun reading it. And I think I would've liked the story... Yeah, that's probably the best way of describing it. 

INT:
So you would like to read the text in the original?

P02B:
Yeah! 

INT:
And in another translation? A better translation?

P02B:
Well, I feel kind of scarred now [laughs], but I wouldn't not give it a try. But I'd prefer the English original.

