Interviewer:
others you're feeling certain parts like the characters different like narrative okay I've done this
P04D  0:16
this start I found quite hard because I didn't really feel like I knew what I was reading yet so like I now know that Wehling is coming back later in the story with when he came back I was oh, I was like oh I remember that he wasn't new but I didn't really remember the introduction about him but that's maybe also because we you have to get into the story, and I did all grasp something of that about it like the futuristic world. 
P04D  1:17
Yeah, I felt that there were a lot of, how you say, "opsommingen" [transl. 'eumerations'], there are a lot of opsommingen [transl. 'enumerations'].
P04D  1:33
Then I lost a bit of my focus for the sentences, because they were very long. Yeah, this poem ... I didn't really know why we had this poem  at this point so I read it but I didn't ...
P04D  1:54
yeah
P04D  1:57
and then when the painting started I really got into the story
P04D  2:17
The 'dropcloth' that was a good description of what he was actually thinking
P04D  2:30
and the 'naught' you really have to think about it 'to be are naught to be'
P04D  2:34
not to be 
P04D  2:46
and I didn't know what 'sobriquets' were so yeah, that sometimes was hard that there were quite difficult English words and I don't think my English is that bad but I didn't, haven't studied English, so it's hard I just didn't really know what they meant.
P04D  3:11
I think this was quite nice.
P04D 3:18
so, there's quite a lot a lot of description which I think is easier to read that if you're reading it in a book...
P04D  3:31
and I got what it would say later in the story they don't use the full terms for the like the word the building word because it's hard to remember
P04D  4:02
here the flow was I think all right. I'm not quite sure what to say about it.
P04D  4:24
So I found the admiration of the... Leora for Dr. Hitz interesting. This is going on already going to tell more about him and they did it and then they do it and I also gotten a lot, like the the soft disposition of it what was she calls? The hostess.
P04D  5:18
and then we get some on Hitz which I was waiting for so that's good that's… 
P04D  5:32
legal implications and legal implications, and I think they may be introduced in the story but I didn't remember it anymore. 
P04Dr  5:47
no I was like oh here's Wheling I know he was introduced in the beginning and that part I had kind of forgot. And here you kind of get back into you think like oh yeah they were in a waiting room.
P04D 6:14
I think if this was a nice to read, it was also a bit of 'spannend' [transl. 'engaging'], engaging yeah
INT
if you think of the metaphor
P04D
Yeah, I had to think about this, it takes a while to get it, it's because I got a little confused and then, I mean what I know what he means.
P04D  7:00
it gets worse
P04D 7:25
then the revolver this here  it kind of gets out of the pace and then there were then I was a little bored and then you're interested again
P04D 7:41
that I find that I found that this was also kind of the climax of the story so yeah, it's not it makes it it's your you don't have it doesn't take a lot of effort to read it.
P04D  8:03
and here I was like oh, because I remember that detail that that painter was thinking of not going to call the bureau of termination to that stop and then he does
INT  8:30
and did you like the story
P04D  8:34
Yeah, I think at a certain point I was interested in it but I felt like that started didn't really it didn't really sink in, might be because of the language or of the cultural screen because yeah... 
P04D  8:58
So I felt like I had to remember quite some details. Because you couldn't really look back. Yeah,
INT 9:08
that's the difficult part of course with this kind of thing. Yeah. Any final comments on the text, thr language, the narrative the characters, your enjoyment, your engagement your experience
P04D  9:27
Yeah, I think there are good parts and less good parts. I always have to look quite... if I have to get into a story, I have to look at the text quite some time and maybe sometimes I skipped a bit too fast to it in the beginning, but I don't know yeah some sentences I think I had to read a few times. Because of the difficulty--for me difficult English words, or, or just movement--Oh, what's actually happened so it hasn't clear overview and then I could go through so understood the text, but then if you go with your eyes over and once more that it helps to have more like a like a picture and then you can get through to the next page.
