INT:
Okay, so you will see your eyes, basically as they go through the pages, and the idea is basically for you to just kind of comment, or like, recall what you were thinking while reading the text. So, like, what were your thoughts? Did you like the story, the characters, the narrative, the style, language, phrases, etc.? Were you confused and why? Did you feel any specific emotions while doing the, while reading the text? Like, yeah, those things

P09A:
Okay, yeah, sure.
[0:49]
Yes, so, here, at the beginning, I was trying to interpret the title and kind of seeing what the situation was. I noticed there was lots of negations at the beginning, so I was wondering whether it was going to be a negative story, or perhaps 'secretely negative', also because I knew of course that it was futuristic, so I was thinking that this might be a dystopian story. 
[1:16]
Here, I was a little confused about the setting. I wasn't really sure where we were and you know, I had expected like some kind of futuristic world but suddenly it seemed mundane and normal and not as if we were in the future. It also kind of felt like we suddenly shifted from this description of the world and the good things to a dingy waiting room, with barely any link or anything to tie it together. So, it was also a little vague what was happening, because you had that Wehling character but then the paint attributes and stuff were mentioned, but not yet the actual painter. 
[2:05]
I did not get the '"grimmige"' [transl. 'grim'] old man', since I do not think a person can be 'grim', I anyway don't understand fully what it means here, as in, was he mean or more gruff or more dark or more evil? Still not sure, to be honest.
[2:41]
The garden seemed very futuristic, but also in some sort of dated way, so to say. Almost 20th century, fascist images, the frescoes you can still see in Rome and stuff. Yeah, in general, the story reminded me strongly of like World War II, especially once the Gas Chambers were mentioned, also the whole eugenetics thing but then backwards now I'm thinking about it. But yeah, like the gas chambers made me pretty uncomfortable also since it's also just such a heavy subject still, so I was hoping it wasn't going to be too heavy-handed or callous.
[3:11]
I liked the song! I was trying to come up with some kind of melody for it. It rhymes a little here and there so I was trying to make it work. In the end I didn't have a clear melody but it was fun.
[3:52]
I liked the back-and-forth between the painter and the nurse, thought it fleshed out their characters and motivations. And then when it mentions the 'Federal Bureau of Termination' I knew that was going to be a problem, because of the 'termination' bit, so I was already expecting this kind of pessimistic, deterministic, destroying force and you do empathise with the painter more, because this does not seem like a good situation or a good world to live in. 
[4:27]
I wasn't reading the enumeration entirely, I mean, I find it difficult to read these long lists anyway, so I just go over it and try to get the gist but I'm not reading every single word. Then with the 'to be or not to be' then I realised it was probably all related to each other.
[4:52]
'washed the brother's ears' sounds weird to me, not sure whether that is just me, yet it feels a little off in Dutch to me.
[5:12]
At this point, I realised like this person is going to be a father with a pregnant wife and he is waiting in some kind of hospital so seems like his wife is due any minute.
[5:38]
And then this woman came in, it was a little weird. Oh right, the description of coarse dangerous-looking woman was weird. I don't really see how she could be coarse and at first I thought she was going to be causing troubles since she was so dangerously-looking, but I don't think that came back anywhere in the story. Her description evoked some strong imagery though, also again with like some of the fascist links with the eagle, also again with like the second world war throughout.
[6:02]
The painter started talking about like 'baptising', 'dompelen' [transl. 'baptising'], and I was thinking that it was a very euphemistic description. I don't know, I thought it was also interesting that it made this connection with religion and getting into heaven, but I also felt like it came out of nowhere and that it didn't really fit, at least not in the way it intended to.
[6:48]
I liked all the different names for the people in the painting and the imagery associated with it, like between the garden and the hostess. I felt that was a nice part. 
[7:01]
Ah yeah, I think this was the first mention of the actual gas chambers. Yeah, so as mentioned that shocked me somewhat, I mean, before this imagery and allusion to fascism and World War II situations had been made, but this felt pretty like intense to me here. 
[07:24]
'een tak afzetten' [transl. 'to take off a branch'] I like got what they mean I think, but wasn't sure about the verb. It also considered that it might be Flemish? I don't know, but it felt weird somehow.

INT [07:51]
Right, then we have a break here. 

P09A [08:01]
Right, yeah, right after the break dr. Hitz comes in, I was wondering when we were going to meet him. 
[08:52]
Here it says that the doctor is making a joke, but I didn't think it was very funny at all, maybe in a very sinister way. Yeah, maybe also since he is so nice to her also later on, but here it almost seems to imply that he wants her to go? Like he wants her to go to the place where people go? 
[09:16]
Right, here they were discussing the triplets and knowing from before that like the painter had this very pregnant wife, would this be their children? And then later we do indeed find out that it is Wehling who is the father, and like Edward was the painter so we realise that his children are indeed born. At it's kind of intense, because it's brought here partly as something happy, but the doctor first tells this to Leora and not to the father himself so that felt odd and perhaps a little sinister as well. 
[09:35]
Here I really sympathised with the father, since the decision he had to make seemed so difficult. As in, will he only have one of his children and how to decide that? How even to convince someone to die for your children, so I felt for him a lot, also because he himself realises his predicament and I liked how he kind of juxtaposes this with the 'euphoric dad-to-be'. 
[10:04]
Ah, the 'enigszins autoritaire houding', the 'somewhat authoritarian stance', I wondered how someone can be 'somewhat authoritarian', especially in the way he is standing. That surprised me a bit, was odd. 
[10:42]
Here we get this stone fruit or something and it became clear that this was indeed some futuristic story, though probably written a while ago with the reference to the year 2000 as a very futuristic but also long-ago period. And here there is a strong dystopian feel with like lack of water and food. 

INT [11:03]
And what did you think of the imagery of the 'steenvrucht' [transl. 'drupelet / (litt. stone fruit)]?

P09A:
I guess I'd say I understood it, but well, only when the doctor was explaining the situation with too many people and the lack of everything. I don't know what a stone fruit or something is, I feel like I've heard of it, but I'm imagining perhaps something like a Jackfruit or Lychee or something? But no, I didn't get really the comparison or the metaphor at first, but I think I understood what he meant. 
[12:06]
And this image of the 'litter box' also seemed very dark to me, also since the doctor is seemingly saying it so sympathetically or nicely, but the imagery is very staggering, especially again, knowing that this probably refers to the gas chambers.  
[12:42]
Which yeah, here, you get Leora or Duncan calling them indeed something like gas chambers, but I was a bit confused by the phrasing at first, because 'ethische zelfdodingsvertrekken' [transl. 'ethical suicide chambers'], yeah that final part I didn't get what it meant, so I was trying to translate it something like 'suicide… places?' almost sounded like AirBnB or something. 
[13:22]
Then here Wehling grabs his gun and shoots the doctor so he has more room and then also the woman. I mean, I get it for the children and the doctor felt very problematic as well, but it also didn't feel like it was very in character, I don't know it felt very sudden and just a bit weird to me and I didn't really get why he now did it like this. Did he also already have the gun? Was it premeditated? Or did he just find a gun somewhere and decided to shoot up the place?
[13:56]
Yeah so then he is like sitting on the ladder and looking down, which seemed a dramatic imagery to me, especially when considering the whole situation of the world, especially just after killing the others. And you can see my eyes going back to 'afdeklakens' (drop cloths), because the word-endings or parts within the word are difficult to make out. And then, yeah, he was thinking of killing himself and then he called the number and then he just makes the appointment which is incredibly quick like so bureaucratic and especially for something like this as if he is making a dentist appointment. So, right, he calls this number and tries to kill himself to sacrifice his own life for his children? I thought it was pretty noble and sad at the same time, but also weird that he like didn't dare to go through with it now, especially after killing the others that easily. So yeah, the ending seemed very dramatic, but it was also presented in this kind of unimportant, throw away style of making this quick appointment.

INT:
Okay, so yeah, this was the end. One thing to, you said that the father was the painter, but there are four characters, so the woman Leora of course, and then Doctor Hitz, the painter and the father whose name is Edward Wehling. And the father shoots himself after shooting the other two and then the painter is kind of witnessing this scene and wants to end it as well, but they are two separate characters.

P09A:
Oh right, yeah, now you mention it I do remember yeah that they are different, but at one point I thought they were the same person, but yeah, I recall that the father shoots himself. Yeah, I don't know why I got confused, but yeah. Ah okay, that does make sense, although I liked the image of the painter as both creator of image and children while also destroying life but not being able to destroy himself nice. But yeah, no I get it now.

INT:
Okay. And what did you think of the text like on the whole? Did you like it?

P09A:
Yeah, I thought it was a very interesting text. The imagery was strong and I thought it was making interesting parallels to other periods and had an interesting moral dilemma, or like premise.

INT:
And like the language and the style?

P09A:
I think it was okay. It did not stuck me specifically, but I think it was fine. Some sentences seemed off, not specifically clear why but the phrasing seems off and some words were jarring, especially the adjectives at certain points. Also, I thought that sometimes there were sudden shifts in the story, or more that the story wasn't always very cohesive that it seemed to jump around in like the setting and characters and like the shifts from one thing to the next were a bit inconclusive, or random. Still, I liked the characterisation and thought the different characters were nice and well-chosen.

INT:
And what did you think of the title of the story, like the whole '2 B R 0 2 B' ('to be or not to be')?

P09A:
Oooh, now I get it. I hadn't realised that! Ah okay, well that's funny. A shame that I didn't see it before, but that's nice. Yeah, it's a good story I'd say.

INT:
And so, you know this is a translation right, from the questionnaire?

P09A:
Yeah, they mentioned it there

INT:
And did you notice while reading the text that you were reading a translation?

P09A:
Not really. I don't know, I just didn't really consider the possibility of it being a translation. In hindsight I feel like I could have known, also with some of the English terms but I don't think I noticed it.

INT:
So the version you read was the post-edited version, which means it was originally translated by a machine and afterwards edited by a professional translator. Did you notice that at any points?

P09A:
I guess not, maybe like what I said, sometimes the phrasing was off or there were some jarring words, and at one point I did think something was expressed a bit weirdly, but I didn't really think anything special of it. More like perhaps not the best style or yeah, I don't know, that also just happens sometimes when writing I guess. 

INT:
Great! Any last comments, ideas, feelings?

P09A:
No, I think that's it. I enjoyed it, it was fun to do!